README.md, before:

# Swift Mock Generator Xcode Source Editor Extension
![Mock Generator Icon](readme/AppIcon_256.png)

An Xcode extension (plugin) to generate [spy](#what-is-a-spy), [stub](#what-is-a-stub), [dummy](#what-is-a-dummy), and [partial spy](#what-is-a-partial-spy) classes automatically.

![Xcode mock generator](readme/XcodeMockGenerator.gif)

[Looking for the AppCode version?](https://github.com/seanhenry/MockGenerator)

## Install Swift Mock Generator Xcode Source Editor Extension

- Close Xcode if it is open
- Download the latest release [here](https://github.com/seanhenry/SwiftMockGeneratorForXcode/releases)
- Copy the app to the `Applications` folder.
- Open the app
- For Mojave users, select OK for '"Swift Mock Generator for Xcode" wants access to control "Xcode"'
- Go to `System Preferences -> Extensions -> Xcode Source Editor` and make sure `Mock Generator` is enabled.
- For Mojave users, go to `System Preferences -> Security & Privacy -> Privacy -> Automation` and make sure `Swift Mock Generator` is enabled.
- Open Xcode

## How to create a new Swift test double

- Create an empty class inheriting from a class or protocols that you wish to mock.

Example:
```
class MyProtocolSpy: MyProtocol {
}
```
- Place the cursor inside the class declaration.
- Click `Editor -> Mock Generator -> Generate spy`.

## How to recreate a Swift mock

There's no need to delete the old code. Simply place the cursor anywhere inside the class declaration and generate the test double as before.

## Recommended: assign a shortcut

- Select preferences `⌘,` in Xcode.
- Choose 'Key Bindings'.
- Search for 'Mock Generator'.
- Choose your preferred shortcut.

## Recommended: use a version control system

The mock generator will replace anything that is currently in your class with the generated test double.

Undo is supported for Xcode plugins but you're safer to use a version control system such as `git` in the event of unexpectedly generating a test double.

## Features

| Feature | Supported |
|---|---|
| Swift 3 and 4.|✅|
| Generate a spy.|✅|
| Generate a stub.|✅|
| Generate a dummy.|✅|
| Generate a partial spy.|✅|
| **Classes and protocols** |
| Generates test doubles conforming to one or many protocols.|✅|
| Generates test doubles conforming to a class.|✅\*|
| Generates test doubles conforming to both classes and protocols.|✅\*|
| **Recording methods, properties and subscripts ** |
| Captures invocation status of methods.|✅|
| Captures invocation status of properties.|✅|
| Captures invocation status of subscripts.|✅|
| Records multiple invocations of methods.|✅|
| Records multiple invocations of properties.|✅|
| Records multiple invocations of subscripts.|✅|
| Captures invoked method parameters.|✅|
| Captures invoked subscript parameters.|✅|
| Records multiple invocations of method parameters.|✅|
| Records multiple invocations of subscript parameters.|✅|
| Supports multiple properties in the same declaration.||
| **Stubbing return values and closures** |
| Stubs values for your test doubles to return.|✅|
| Stubs a default value for return values where possible.|✅|
| Automatically calls closure parameters with stubbed values.|✅|
| **Initializers** |
| Generates convenience initializers requiring no parameters.|✅|
| Supports initializers with arguments.|✅|
| Supports failable initializers.|✅|
| Supports required initializers.|✅|
| **Throws** |
| Stub an error for your overridden method to throw. |✅|
| Supports throwing initializers. |✅|
| Supports throwing closures. |✅|
| **Generics** |
| Generates generic test doubles from protocols with associated types.||
| Captures invoked generic parameters. |✅ \*\*|
| Captures invoked generic return values. |✅ \*\*|
| **Scope, keywords, and more** |
| Avoids naming clashes from overloaded methods.|✅|
| Supports parameter type-annotation attributes and `inout`.|✅|
| Respects the test double scope and generates `public` and `open` methods and properties.||
| Generate test doubles inheriting from items in 3rd party frameworks.||

\* properties with inferred types are not supported

\*\* generic arguments in closures and generic types are not supported, generic subscript parameters are also not supported

## Feature requests

If there is a feature you need, check for an existing GitHub issue and make a comment or, if no issue exists, raise a new issue.

## Usage example

A protocol called Animator that we wish to spy on:

```
protocol Animator {
  func animate(duration: TimeInterval, animations: () -> (), completion: (Bool) -> ()) -> Bool
}
```
Create a spy class conforming to a protocol:
```
class AnimatorSpy: Animator {
}
```
Generate the spy:

```
class AnimatorSpy: Animator {

  var invokedAnimate = false
  var invokedAnimateCount = 0
  var invokedAnimateParameters: (duration: TimeInterval, Void)?
  var invokedAnimateParametersList = [(duration: TimeInterval, Void)]()
  var shouldInvokeAnimateAnimations = false
  var stubbedAnimateCompletionResult: (Bool, Void)?
  var stubbedAnimateResult: Bool! = false

  func animate(duration: TimeInterval, animations: () -> (), completion: (Bool) -> ()) -> Bool {
    invokedAnimate = true
    invokedAnimateCount += 1
    invokedAnimateParameters = (duration, ())
    invokedAnimateParametersList.append((duration, ()))
    if shouldInvokeAnimateAnimations {
      animations()
    }
    if let result = stubbedAnimateCompletionResult {
      completion(result.0)
    }
    return stubbedAnimateResult
  }
}
```
Inject the spy into the class you wish to test:

```
let animatorSpy = AnimatorSpy()
let object = ObjectToTest(animator: animatorSpy)
```
Test if animate method was invoked:

```
func test_spyCanVerifyInvokedMethod() {
  object.myMethod()
  XCTAssertTrue(animatorSpy.invokedAnimate)
}
```
Test the correct parameter was passed to the animate method:

```
func test_spyCanVerifyInvokedParameters() {
  object.myMethod()
  XCTAssertEqual(animatorSpy.invokedAnimateParameters?.duration, 5)
}
```
Test the number of times animate was invoked:

```
func test_spyCanVerifyInvokedMethodCount() {
  object.myMethod()
  object.myMethod()
  XCTAssertEqual(animatorSpy.invokedAnimateCount, 2)
}
```
Test the parameters passed into each call of the animate method:

```
func test_spyCanVerifyMultipleInvokedMethodParameters() {
  object.myMethod()
  object.myMethod()
  XCTAssertEqual(animatorSpy.invokedAnimateParametersList[0].duration, 5)
  XCTAssertEqual(animatorSpy.invokedAnimateParametersList[1].duration, 5)
}
```
Stub a return value for the animate method:

```
func test_spyCanReturnAStubbedValue() {
  animatorSpy.stubbedAnimateResult = true
  let result = object.myMethod()
  XCTAssertTrue(result)
}
```
Stub the value for the completion closure in the animate method:

```
func test_spyCanCallClosure_withStubbedValue() {
  animatorSpy.stubbedAnimateCompletionResult = (false, ())
  object.myMethod()
  XCTAssertFalse(object.animationDidComplete)
}
```

## What is a spy?

Spies are stubs that also record some information based on how they were called. One form of this might be an email service that records how many messages it was sent. [See reference](https://martinfowler.com/bliki/TestDouble.html)

## What is a stub?

Stubs provide canned answers to calls made during the test, usually not responding at all to anything outside what's programmed in for the test. [See reference](https://martinfowler.com/bliki/TestDouble.html)

## What is a dummy?

Dummy objects are passed around but never actually used. Usually they are just used to fill parameter lists. [See reference](https://martinfowler.com/bliki/TestDouble.html)

## What is a partial spy?

Partial spies are spies which can also forward calls to the original implementation.

## Disable or remove the plugin

To disable:

Go to `System Preferences -> Extensions` and deselect the extension under `Xcode Source Editor`.

To remove:

Delete the app.

## Troubleshooting

You might find that you are not able to see the plugin in the Editor menu or even in the Extensions preference pane. This seems to be caused by installing your Xcode version(s) outside of the App Store. If this happens, open Terminal and run:

```
$ pluginkit -m -p com.apple.dt.Xcode.extension.source-editor -A -D -vvv
```

If you can't see the plugin in this list then you can reset your list of plugins by running the following in Terminal:

```
$ PATH=/System/Library/Frameworks/CoreServices.framework/Frameworks/LaunchServices.framework/Support:"$PATH"
$ lsregister -f /Applications/Xcode.app
```

See [here](https://nshipster.com/xcode-source-extensions/) for more information.

If the above fails, then completely removing the plugin and downloading/installing it again seems to work.

## Nomenclature

Despite being called a Mock Generator, this plugin actually generates a spy, stub or dummy. The word 'mock', whilst not technically correct, has been used because test doubles such as spies, mocks, and stubs have become commonly known as mocks.

## Build

This project currently depends on some private libraries so it cannot currently be built by a third party.

# Credits

Many thanks to the contributors of [SourceKitten](https://github.com/jpsim/SourceKitten) for making such an easy-to-use wrapper around SourceKit.

Many thanks to the contributors of [swift-ast](https://github.com/yanagiba/swift-ast) for a great lexer which has made writing a parser much easier.

Many thanks to the contributors of [kotlin-native](https://github.com/JetBrains/kotlin-native) for a Kotlin LLVM backend which enables code sharing between the Xcode and AppCode plugins.

Many thanks to the contributors of [GRMustache](https://github.com/groue/GRMustache) for a enabling great Mustache test double templates.

And special thanks to everyone who is contributing by raising issues and feature requests.

This tool wouldn't exist without you all!

Commit message:

Supports Xcode 11 by adding SDK path field

README.md, after:

# Swift Mock Generator Xcode Source Editor Extension
![Mock Generator Icon](readme/AppIcon_256.png)

An Xcode extension (plugin) to generate [spy](#what-is-a-spy), [stub](#what-is-a-stub), [dummy](#what-is-a-dummy), and [partial spy](#what-is-a-partial-spy) classes automatically.

![Xcode mock generator](readme/XcodeMockGenerator.gif)

[Looking for the AppCode version?](https://github.com/seanhenry/MockGenerator)

## Install Swift Mock Generator Xcode Source Editor Extension

- Close Xcode if it is open
- Download the latest release [here](https://github.com/seanhenry/SwiftMockGeneratorForXcode/releases)
- Copy the app to the `Applications` folder.
- Open the app
- Select OK for '"Swift Mock Generator for Xcode" wants access to control "Xcode"'
- Set the SDK Path. Xcode 11 example: `/Applications/Xcode.app/Contents/Developer/Platforms/MacOSX.platform/Developer/SDKs/MacOSX10.15.sdk`. [Why do I need to do this?](#setting-the-sdk-path)
- Go to `System Preferences -> Extensions -> Xcode Source Editor` and make sure `Mock Generator` is enabled.
- Go to `System Preferences -> Security & Privacy -> Privacy -> Automation` and make sure `Swift Mock Generator` is enabled.
- Open Xcode

## How to create a new Swift test double

- Create an empty class inheriting from a class or protocols that you wish to mock.

Example:
```
class MyProtocolSpy: MyProtocol {
}
```
- Place the cursor inside the class declaration.
- Click `Editor -> Mock Generator -> Generate spy`.

## How to recreate a Swift mock

There's no need to delete the old code. Simply place the cursor anywhere inside the class declaration and generate the test double as before.

## Recommended: assign a shortcut

- Select preferences `⌘,` in Xcode.
- Choose 'Key Bindings'.
- Search for 'Mock Generator'.
- Choose your preferred shortcut.

## Recommended: use a version control system

The mock generator will replace anything that is currently in your class with the generated test double.

Undo is supported for Xcode plugins but you're safer to use a version control system such as `git` in the event of unexpectedly generating a test double.

## Features

| Feature | Supported |
|---|---|
| Swift 5.|✅|
| Generate a spy.|✅|
| Generate a stub.|✅|
| Generate a dummy.|✅|
| Generate a partial spy.|✅|
| **Classes and protocols** |
| Generates test doubles conforming to one or many protocols.|✅|
| Generates test doubles conforming to a class.|✅\*|
| Generates test doubles conforming to both classes and protocols.|✅\*|
| **Recording methods, properties and subscripts ** |
| Captures invocation status of methods.|✅|
| Captures invocation status of properties.|✅|
| Captures invocation status of subscripts.|✅|
| Records multiple invocations of methods.|✅|
| Records multiple invocations of properties.|✅|
| Records multiple invocations of subscripts.|✅|
| Captures invoked method parameters.|✅|
| Captures invoked subscript parameters.|✅|
| Records multiple invocations of method parameters.|✅|
| Records multiple invocations of subscript parameters.|✅|
| Supports multiple properties in the same declaration.||
| **Stubbing return values and closures** |
| Stubs values for your test doubles to return.|✅|
| Stubs a default value for return values where possible.|✅|
| Automatically calls closure parameters with stubbed values.|✅|
| **Initializers** |
| Generates convenience initializers requiring no parameters.|✅|
| Supports initializers with arguments.|✅|
| Supports failable initializers.|✅|
| Supports required initializers.|✅|
| **Throws** |
| Stub an error for your overridden method to throw. |✅|
| Supports throwing initializers. |✅|
| Supports throwing closures. |✅|
| **Generics** |
| Generates generic test doubles from protocols with associated types.||
| Captures invoked generic parameters. |✅ \*\*|
| Captures invoked generic return values. |✅ \*\*|
| **Scope, keywords, and more** |
| Avoids naming clashes from overloaded methods.|✅|
| Supports parameter type-annotation attributes and `inout`.|✅|
| Respects the test double scope and generates `public` and `open` methods and properties.||
| Generate test doubles inheriting from items in 3rd party frameworks.||

\* properties with inferred types are not supported

\*\* generic arguments in closures and generic types are not supported, generic subscript parameters are also not supported

## Feature requests

If there is a feature you need, check for an existing GitHub issue and make a comment or, if no issue exists, raise a new issue.

## Usage example

A protocol called Animator that we wish to spy on:

```
protocol Animator {
  func animate(duration: TimeInterval, animations: () -> (), completion: (Bool) -> ()) -> Bool
}
```
Create a spy class conforming to a protocol:
```
class AnimatorSpy: Animator {
}
```
Generate the spy:

```
class AnimatorSpy: Animator {

  var invokedAnimate = false
  var invokedAnimateCount = 0
  var invokedAnimateParameters: (duration: TimeInterval, Void)?
  var invokedAnimateParametersList = [(duration: TimeInterval, Void)]()
  var shouldInvokeAnimateAnimations = false
  var stubbedAnimateCompletionResult: (Bool, Void)?
  var stubbedAnimateResult: Bool! = false

  func animate(duration: TimeInterval, animations: () -> (), completion: (Bool) -> ()) -> Bool {
    invokedAnimate = true
    invokedAnimateCount += 1
    invokedAnimateParameters = (duration, ())
    invokedAnimateParametersList.append((duration, ()))
    if shouldInvokeAnimateAnimations {
      animations()
    }
    if let result = stubbedAnimateCompletionResult {
      completion(result.0)
    }
    return stubbedAnimateResult
  }
}
```
Inject the spy into the class you wish to test:

```
let animatorSpy = AnimatorSpy()
let object = ObjectToTest(animator: animatorSpy)
```
Test if animate method was invoked:

```
func test_spyCanVerifyInvokedMethod() {
  object.myMethod()
  XCTAssertTrue(animatorSpy.invokedAnimate)
}
```
Test the correct parameter was passed to the animate method:

```
func test_spyCanVerifyInvokedParameters() {
  object.myMethod()
  XCTAssertEqual(animatorSpy.invokedAnimateParameters?.duration, 5)
}
```
Test the number of times animate was invoked:

```
func test_spyCanVerifyInvokedMethodCount() {
  object.myMethod()
  object.myMethod()
  XCTAssertEqual(animatorSpy.invokedAnimateCount, 2)
}
```
Test the parameters passed into each call of the animate method:

```
func test_spyCanVerifyMultipleInvokedMethodParameters() {
  object.myMethod()
  object.myMethod()
  XCTAssertEqual(animatorSpy.invokedAnimateParametersList[0].duration, 5)
  XCTAssertEqual(animatorSpy.invokedAnimateParametersList[1].duration, 5)
}
```
Stub a return value for the animate method:

```
func test_spyCanReturnAStubbedValue() {
  animatorSpy.stubbedAnimateResult = true
  let result = object.myMethod()
  XCTAssertTrue(result)
}
```
Stub the value for the completion closure in the animate method:

```
func test_spyCanCallClosure_withStubbedValue() {
  animatorSpy.stubbedAnimateCompletionResult = (false, ())
  object.myMethod()
  XCTAssertFalse(object.animationDidComplete)
}
```

## What is a spy?

Spies are stubs that also record some information based on how they were called. One form of this might be an email service that records how many messages it was sent. [See reference](https://martinfowler.com/bliki/TestDouble.html)

## What is a stub?

Stubs provide canned answers to calls made during the test, usually not responding at all to anything outside what's programmed in for the test. [See reference](https://martinfowler.com/bliki/TestDouble.html)

## What is a dummy?

Dummy objects are passed around but never actually used. Usually they are just used to fill parameter lists. [See reference](https://martinfowler.com/bliki/TestDouble.html)

## What is a partial spy?

Partial spies are spies which can also forward calls to the original implementation.

## Setting the sdk path

Since Xcode 11, SourceKit needs to know which sdk is being used. For the purposes of this plugin, it doesn't seem to matter which platform this sdk belongs to so this can just be the macOS sdk. To list the macOS SDKs bundled in Xcode:

```
$ ls /Applications/Xcode.app/Contents/Developer/Platforms/MacOSX.platform/Developer/SDKs
```

You will need to copy the full path of one of these SDKs to the companion app.

If you have more that one Xcode installed you will also need to make sure the SDK is belongs to the right version of Xcode. For example, the SDKs in Xcode 10 do not work with SourceKit in Xcode 11.

## Disable or remove the plugin

To disable:

Go to `System Preferences -> Extensions` and deselect the extension under `Xcode Source Editor`.

To remove:

Delete the app.

## Troubleshooting

You might find that you are not able to see the plugin in the Editor menu or even in the Extensions preference pane. This seems to be caused by installing your Xcode version(s) outside of the App Store. If this happens, open Terminal and run:

```
$ pluginkit -m -p com.apple.dt.Xcode.extension.source-editor -A -D -vvv
```

If you can't see the plugin in this list then you can reset your list of plugins by running the following in Terminal:

```
$ PATH=/System/Library/Frameworks/CoreServices.framework/Frameworks/LaunchServices.framework/Support:"$PATH"
$ lsregister -f /Applications/Xcode.app
```

See [here](https://nshipster.com/xcode-source-extensions/) for more information.

If the above fails, then completely removing the plugin and downloading/installing it again seems to work.

## Nomenclature

Despite being called a Mock Generator, this plugin actually generates a spy, stub or dummy. The word 'mock', whilst not technically correct, has been used because test doubles such as spies, mocks, and stubs have become commonly known as mocks.

## Build

This project currently depends on some private libraries so it cannot currently be built by a third party.

# Credits

Many thanks to the contributors of [SourceKitten](https://github.com/jpsim/SourceKitten) for making such an easy-to-use wrapper around SourceKit.

Many thanks to the contributors of [swift-ast](https://github.com/yanagiba/swift-ast) for a great lexer which has made writing a parser much easier.

Many thanks to the contributors of [kotlin-native](https://github.com/JetBrains/kotlin-native) for a Kotlin LLVM backend which enables code sharing between the Xcode and AppCode plugins.

Many thanks to the contributors of [GRMustache](https://github.com/groue/GRMustache) for a enabling great Mustache test double templates.

And special thanks to everyone who is contributing by raising issues and feature requests.

This tool wouldn't exist without you all!
